3 March 1998

                         PROTOMAT 10.0 Programs

	The compressed tar file "protomat.tar.Z" contains the source code
for the UNIX versions of the PROTOMAT programs documented in "protomat.doc",
except for the "results" program which has not been modified to run on UNIX
systems. To request the DOS version is no longer supported.

	Please note that these programs are copyrighted by the Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center and any copy of them must include the copyright notice.
Redistribution for profit requires the express, written permission of FHCRC.
If you find the programs useful, please cite:

        S.Henikoff and J.Henikoff, NAR 19:23, 6565-6572 (1991).

	These are the program versions used to created version 10.0 of the 
blocks database based on PROSITE 14.0. Since the examples presented in our
paper were taken from version 3.0 of the blocks database based on PROSITE 7.0
and used older versions of the programs, results may differ.

	Although the basic algorithms for the motif finder (motifj program) and
motif assembler (motomat program) remain the same, major adjustments were made 
to the PROTOMAT programs for this release with the intention of improving
the results, first by saving fewer motifs spread along more of the
sequence lengths (motifj), and secondly by the reducing competition between
overlapping motifs during assembly (motomat). We also now run a new 
program (addseqs) to add related sequences excluded from the blocks by
PROTOMAT back into the blocks: these sequences are added only if they
can be aligned with all of the blocks in the correct order using the
BLIMPS searching procedure.

	The programs require a standard C compiler. In order to prepare them
for use, follow these steps:

	1. ftp ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/repository/blocks/unix/protomat/protomat.tar.Z
	2. uncompress protomat.tar.Z
        3. tar -xvf protomat.tar
        4. make protomat
	5. cccb.csh addseqs, blweight, blalign, cobbler

The Makefile should compile 5 programs. They are:
	protomot	Reads prosite.dat and makes lists of sequences for
			protein groups.
	uextract	Extracts the lists of sequences from SWISS-PROT
			and executes motifj.
	motifj		Motif finder. Executes motomat.
	motomat		Motif assembler; produces blocks.
	matodat		Calibrates blocks (requires that the blocks be
			searched vs SWISS-PROT using BLIMPS first).

The cccb.csh shell can be used to compile programs requiring the BLIMPS
libraries:
	addseqs		Tries to add sequences to blocks.
	blweight	Adds sequence weights to blocks.
	blalign		Utility to read blocks, list sequence segments, etc.
	cobbler		Makes COBBLER sequence from blocks.

Obtain BLIMPS from:
	ftp ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/repository/blocks/unix/blimps/blimps-#.tar.Z

Sample shells to execute the programs are included, look for *.csh.
The Blocks Database is made by running protomot.csh, then uextract.csh:
PS00094.csh runs motifj and motomat for the cytosine methylases.
A sample Block Maker run, with user-supplied proteins instead of using
a PROSITE group, is "blockmaker.csh example/lipo".


KNOWN PROBLEMS:  The "uextract" program only extracts sequences reliably from 
a database in typical "fasta" format, with a one line title starting with ">".
It will extract sequences from the EMBL CDROM file /cdrom/pirform/swiss.seq,
but it cannot tell which sequences are fragments . It has problems extracting
sequences from a database in which the IDs are not in sorted order. YOU MUST
VERIFY THAT SEQUENCES EXTRACTED WITH UEXTRACT, OR PREPARED IN ANY OTHER WAY,
HAVE BEEN FORMATTED CORRECTLY, see the examples in the PS00094 sub-directory
included with the tar file.
	PROTOMAT tends to give mediocre results for very large groups with a
large number of repeats (e.g. PS00018 and PS00022). The programs have hard
limits on the maximum number of sequences and repeats (MAXSEQS and MAXFREQ
in motifj.h), so in order to process very large groups we recommend purging
the sequence set (using Andy Neuwald's "purge" program for instance) down
to 400 sequences, and adding the remaining sequences to the resulting blocks
using the new addseqs program. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jorja and Steven Henikoff
Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
1100 Fairview AV N, A1-111, Seattle, WA 98109
Telephone: (206) 667-4515, FAX: (206) 667-5889
Email: henikoff@muller.fhcrc.org
